---
layout: post
title:  "The Car Saga"
date:   2015-08-15 21:44:35
---

The car is finally running! As proof, I'm writing this from my sister's house in Camphill Village on the other side of New York from where the car was repaired. When I say "repaired", let me tell you, that word is too mild for what we did to it. I will attempt to remember all the parts we replaced/cleaned/fixed/healed, but it's almost inevitable that I leave out something or a portion of the saga. Because, you see, Dad and I have been working on it since the "short block" (i.e. the core of the engine where the pistons live, minus the cylinder heads) came back from the shop all those weeks ago. We have toiled and slaved away on the car for over a month, but it all paid off in the end. Here's about how it went:

## Back from the shop
The short block returned from the shop, and we reassembled the engine. Once there were enough parts back on to lower it into the car, we cleaned the transmission bell, and, after two days, had the engine in place and bolted down. Alas that's not quite how it went, that would be too easy. First we had to clean out lots of bolt holes in various places, as mud-dauber wasps had filled them with bugs and dirt. On top of that, the fuel lines on the intake manifold needed cleaning, and the clutch had to be replaced. Once that was done we could put the engine in the car, and it took two days to get it mated with the transmission. The first time we got it in, after much tightening of bolts and wiggling and jerking, realized the bolt holes were plugged and had to pull the engine back out. Once the holes were cleaned out (more wasp mud) we had to lower it back into the car, and again achieve the precise angle at which the engine guiding pins would slot perfectly into the holes in the transmission. Along the way we discovered, after removing layers of rust, the oil pan had a pinhole in it and needed to either be replaced entirely or repaired. We went for the faster option, repair, and drove a screw through the hole and epoxied over both sides of the screw. Over the dried epoxy we sprayed Rustoleum "rust reformer" and put it back on the engine. Little did we know, this wasn't the last time we'd be dealing with the oil pans rusty problems.

## Our first mistake
With the engine in the car, it wasn't long before we came across the alternator, frozen. After a trip to the junkyard, we had a new side mirror (the plastic housing of the old one had broken) and a questionable alternator. The front tires also needed replacing as the originals had been cannibalized for another car. Upon finishing the assembly of the car and a twist of the key, with hopes soaring high, nothing happened. Almost utter silence. We did some poking around and removed the all too quiet starter. It was also frozen but after cleaning and lubricating the components, it was ready to go.

Another key turn, and the engine came to life. Not really life, but it made sound, and to our horror and dismay, spewed oil everywhere! We called up the guy who worked on the short block -- he told us to call if we had any questions during the reassembly -- and were informed we probably installed the head gaskets backwards. That meant we would have to pull the cylinder heads off the engine and flip the gaskets around. We looked carefully at the gaskets and sure enough, that was the issue. The installing of the gaskets had happened almost immediately after getting the engine back, it was very early in the process. As you can imagine, this was extremely discouraging; we were very fed up and frustrated with the car due to the numerous roadblocks already and then this. Well, we took stock of the situation and what all exactly we'd have to remove to flip the gaskets. Our best guess (informed by the retold efforts of someone online) was two days of labor, in spite of the fact it had taken us two weeks to get to that point. The difference was we wouldn't have to pull the engine back out and all the cleaning and replacing of the parts wouldn't have to be repeated. In the end, it took us closer to three days, maybe two and a half, and turned the key again.

## The knocking and an inspection
This time the car came to life, without spewing oil, but the engine was racing (i.e. as if at full throttle). We scratched our heads over that one for a while, and then noticed the throttle cables hadn't been connected properly. With that problem solved, the car ran but with a knocking sound. Ugh. As anyone with a vehicle that's had a knocking sound knows, the causes of these sounds are often quite unpleasant for a persons wallet. For example, a common cause is something called "piston slap", produced by a piston being just loose enough in the cylinder to wiggle as it moves and slap against the cylinder wall. Only, we had a brand new short block so this couldn't be the cause, or so we told ourselves. So we investigated. And did more looking and listening. Ultimately we couldn't find any cause for this sound, and I drove it to a local shop to have a friend there have a listen. But I should back up.

I forgot to say that the exhaust had a serious problem. About half way between the engine and the tailpipe, the pipe was rusted through. This meant, as you can imagine, it was very loud. So loud in fact, you could barely hear the sound of the engine over the exhaust. In addition, the oil pan had another leak in it, right beside the hole we'd patched. And to top it all off, the check engine light was on. The engine code indicated the "fuel level sender unit" -- fancy name for the gauge in the fuel tank -- was sending bad data (i.e. broken). One cause for this engine code can be lack of pressure in the tank caused by a loose gas cap. In our case, the car didn't have a gas cap, it had been lost years ago. So with hopes high once more, I scheduled an inspection at a local shop, bought a gas cap, and took it for inspection. Upon arrival I was immediately informed the check engine light being on prevented the car from passing inspection, no checking the code to verify it was a safety issue, just flat out denied. I was to put another hundred miles on the vehicle after reseting the light and come back. (Did I mention the car wasn't registered? Ah, yes, well, it wasn't.) So now I had to put a hundred miles on this unregistered, uninspected vehicle with a knocking sound and a crazy loud exhaust. Pretty inspiring start to a trip around the country, right?

## Break down
So, as I was saying, we couldn't find the cause of the knocking sound, and deeming that worrisome sound more dire than the loud exhaust or gas gauge problem, I drove it to another shop to have a family friend listen. He said it wasn't anything to worry about, as it didn't sound fatal to the car. He took one look at the bolts we had exposed to the gas tank where the faulty fuel sensor was, and said not to touch it. As we were well aware, the tiny bolts holding the sensor in were completely rusted and built into the tank. If we wanted to replace the sensor, we'd almost certainly have to replace the tank. With the weight of the knocking sound not being fatal off my shoulders, I returned home. Part way. I got about five miles from the shop, and the car started shaking, making lots of noise (even more than before), and the check engine light started flashing! I pulled over and phoned home. I checked the oil and it appeared to have all leaked out, the hole had gotten bigger. With this news, Dad drove to meet me with a fresh bottle of oil, and we filled it up. The additional oil didn't help one bit. The shaking and the now banging sound, was still present. With no method of inspecting the vehicle further on the side of the road, I was forced to hobble it home.

## Mystery solved
The engine codes that were now on let us know three of the four cylinders were misfiring. A myriad of things can cause this but several could be ruled out because the short block was new. (Remember how I mentioned we thought the short block wasn't a problem? The likelihood of it causing all our problems seemed to be increasing.) It appeared probable that the old gas we had left in the car was dirty enough to be plugging up the fuel injectors, triggering the misfires. With that in mind, we bought cleaner and ran a portion of it through the engine. No change. Maybe it needed to have more cleaner run through. So we drove it and took the time to repair the exhaust and replace the oil pan. Still no change. Then maybe it was a vacuum leak, so we bought carburettor cleaner and sprayed it on all the vacuum lines. If there was a leak it would get sucked up and make the engine surge. No leak. Then we replaced the spark plugs and the wires, but those weren't the problem either. In a last ditch effort, Dad got an old piece of garden hose, and, placing one end in his ear, moved the other around the engine, listening for the source of the knocking. (We'd tried this once before and couldn't hear anything.) He found the source of the sound in a couple minutes. It was clearly coming from the right cylinder head. We'd inspected this cylinder head before as we thought that's where the sound had been coming from, but when we removed the cover plate, everything appeared to be fine. But this was different, the sound was much louder and clearly originating from within the head. We pulled the cover plate and to our surprise, the bolts holding the arm roller in place, were visibly loose and standing away from the roller.

## Purring to life
After tightening the bolts and readjusting the valve clearances on that head, the same was done on the other head. The left head was not in such bad shape, but everything was tightened and adjusted anyway. As it turns out, we had grossly under-tightened the arm roller bolts and they had jiggled free on their own. Once it was all buttoned up, we turned the car on. It was with joy that we stood and listened to the quiet purring of the engine. We had finally solved the mystery of the knocking sound and the misfiring in one go. It was a great moment in the history of this car's repair.

## Always something
With the car finally running you might think that meant it was time to pass inspection and hit the road! Nope. The engine light came on again because this time there was a leak in the fuel system (causing a pressure drop), and the exhaust was dirty enough to set off another engine code. More poking and we determined there was a hole on the top of the gas tank. Fixing that would mean dropping the tank which meant a lot of work and we were sick of working on this car. The hole didn't cause any gas to escape, just be bothersome enough to set off the light.

As for the exhaust, it was possible it could be fixed with some cleaner. However, the day we were going to put the cleaner in the car, the check engine light went off. It went off Sunday morning, after going to morning mass. We got a kick out of that. I put the cleaner in anyhow and the light thought about coming on a couple times (there was a "pending engine code") but never stayed on. I called Monday to make an inspection appointment and had it inspected Tuesday. It passed! Let me say that again: it passed! This meant the car was officially roadworthy and I could leave for my trip. Funnily enough, the check engine light came back on that same night and hasn't gone off since. Always for the same thing, engine code P0420, problem with the exhaust, not worth fixing.

## The End
That's about how it went. It was a long, grueling struggle, and the whole family is glad it's finally over. This trip to visit family on the East side of the state and down to NYC and back is the car's final test drive before I head off. If all goes well, and I return home tomorrow without any car issues, I will leave within the week. Lookout Syracuse!

## Pictures
<iframe src="https://www.flickr.com/photos/133778021@N05/20654162016/in/set-72157655103854123/player/" width="800" height="534" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen oallowfullscreen msallowfullscreen></iframe>
